# ortografia-nahuatl
Una herramienta para convertir texto escribido en ortografías modernas del Náhuatl a la ortografía clásica.

English: 
This is a tool to convert text written in modern Nahuatl orthographies to the classical orthography. It was intended to be used to normalize large bodies of text for computational linguistics/NLP purposes.

To use it, just open up the command line in the folder with the files and type in 'python main.py' (without the apostrophes). It will prompt you to write several Nahuatl words in the orthography the text is currently written in, so it can get information about the orthography. It will then prompt you for a source file, that being the one that has the text that you want to convert in it. Make sure the file is in the same folder as the code and that it is a plant text (.txt) file. When you give the name of the file, do not forget to write .txt at the end. After that, it will prompt you to provide an output file name. Name the file and add .txt to the end. It will write the output in the file.

By default, the text will not detect people's names or words written in a Spanish orthography, so if it sees 'hasta' in a text where 's' is being converted to 'z', it will rewrite it as 'hazta'. You can change this, but know that the program will take orders of magnitude longer to run on large text files. Go in to the main.py file, and remove the pound simbols before on lines 31 and 81. Then, open up the text file entitled 'esp_vocabu.txt', that should be empty. Fill it up with any words you do not want the program to change (they could be names of people like 'Abel', place names like 'Veracruz,' Spanish words like 'hasta', or any other words you wouldn't want to change). Any words on the list that appear in the text will not be changed by the program. For example, entering in the sentence 'Ne siuatl iuan ne tlakatl kittaj ne burro' would normally become 'Ne cihuatl ihuan ne tlacatl quittah ne borro,' but if you were to get rid of the pound simbols and add 'burro' as a 'sacred word,' you would get 'Ne cihuatl ihuan ne tlacatl quittah ne burro,' with 'burro' not changing.
